## Coding for now vs Coding for the future
Suppose there are many user stories in the product backlog for a product that you are working on. You are about to start doing design for one of the user stories now. As you do this design, to what extent should your design account for other user stories? For example, should you only look at your user story and do design that is optimal for only your user story? Should you try to do your desgin for your user story in such a way that the other user stories in the product backlog will be easier? Should we take it one step further and try to do our design such that future user stories that we haven't came up yet will be easier? In most cases, this is a question of how generic and re-usable our code should be. In other cases, it is a question of which scenarios our code should account for. Let's take a look at two different approaches: coding for now vs coding for the future.

### Coding for now
In this scenario, we write just enough code to meet the current requirements. We do not spend any time trying to make our code work for potential future use-cases that we don't currently have. We don't attempt to make our code any more generic than needed to solve the current problem we have. If there is a scenario that we are unsure as to whether or not we will need to account for in the future, we don't account for it right now. If it later becomes confirmed that we need to account for this scenario, we will then make the code change to account for it. 
