# Defect Management Recommendations

### Place defects in the same backlog as enhancements
Having defects in a separate backlog than enhancements makes it more difficult to prioritize. The product owner now has to look at two different backlogs in order to determine what to do next. Is the top item on the enhancement backlog or the top item on the defect backlog more important? With enhancements and defects in the same backlog, it is easy. The backlog is sorted by priority. If a particular defect is more important than a particular enhancement, then the defect goes higher up in the backlog than the enhancement and vice-versa. Having the defects and enhancements in the same backlog makes it very easy to visualize which work to do next. This is where the saying 'one product one backlog' comes from.

### We don't need to always fix defects immediately
Some teams do what is called a zero defect backlog approach. For some teams, this means that whenever a defect is reported, at least one person has to immediately stop the enhancement they are doing and fix the defect right away. Other teams are more flexible with the zero defect backlog approach and have a policy of just needing to get any incoming defect fixed within, say, 4 months of being reported.

Martin Fowler and Kent Beck are opposed to the idea of a zero defect backlog. The problem with the zero defect backlog approach is that it assumes that stopping to fix an incoming defect in production is always going to be what is in the best interest of the customer. We have to think in terms of opportunity cost here. Time spent fixing a defect is less time spent working on a feature and vice-versa. There will be scenarios in which stopping work on a feature to fix a defect is what is in the best interest of the customer. There will be scenarios in which finishing the feature before fixing the defect is what is in the best interest of the customer. The customer has to make a judgement call about whether to continue working on the feature or to stop to fix the defect.

### Minimizing waste when it comes to defect management
In a perfect world, we would have everyone on the team work on the same release which is the next release. We wouldn't switch to something else until we release. This will make for the earliest releases to market. Let's say we have feature A which is 1 month of work and feature B which is also 1 month of work. Let's say that feature A and B can be released individually. It doesn't make sense to complete part of feature A and then switch to feature B without releasing feature A. Having multiple partially complete features at a time is just more waste because value is not delivered until we release.

The same thing could be said about defects. Suppose there is some known defect called Defect A. Also, suppose defect A will take a bit of work and can be worked on by everyone at the same time. Also suppose we have a feature we are about to work on called feature A. It would not make sense to complete part of feature A, switch to fixing defect A, and then come back to finish feature A. We should do all of feature A followed by all of defect A or do all of defect A followed by all of feature A. The product owner will identify whether feature A or defect A is of a higher priority and that one will be done first.

Great! So whenever we start working on a feature, we should never have anyone switch to working on a defect until we release our feature, right? Well unfortunately, it's not that simple. If we were somehow aware of all defects in production, then yes; switching to work on a defect after already having completed part of a feature would just mean that we should have done the defect first. However, we won't be aware of all of the defects in production at any given time. Some of the defects won't be discovered by or reported by our clients until we are in the middle of working on a feature. If this defect is more important than the feature we are working on, then at least one person needs to stop working on the feature to start working on this defect. As a result we will often times be simultaneously working on one feature as well as zero or more defects.

### Should we have a separate development team for support?
Suppose we have a development team that works on creating new features as well as supporting existing features in production. What some people will do is take this team and break it into two teams: one team that is only responsible for creating new features and one team that is only responsible for support. Suppose we have 5 software engineers. We might put 1 or 2 of them on support while the remainder work on features. The people on the support team are fully allocated to support and must investigate incoming defects as well as fix incoming defects. If they have some free time as a result of no incoming defects, they would work on tech debt. The people on the feature team would continue to work on new features and any issues found in production would go to the support team. Any issues found during testing internally would be fixed by the feature team.

Some groups using this technique will periodically do rotations where people from the support team get rotated back into the enhancement team and vice versa. Other groups might not choose to implement rotations. The problem with being permanently allocated to support is that it leads to high turnover due to not being as enjoyable. It also doesn't provide for as much of a learning experience. The best learning experience for a software engineer comes from obtaining experience in both enhancements and defect corrections. Working in support provides insight valuable insights that can help you when you switch back to enhancements. So if we chose to go the route of having a separate team for support, we want to implement support rotations. Now that we understand how having a separate team for support works, it's time to answer the question: should we have a separate team for support?

Martin Fowler and Kent Beck say no. The problem with having separate teams for support and enhancements is that it results in people working on work that may not be the highest priority work at the time. The people on support are fully allocated to support. If there aren't many incoming defects during a particular time period, these people still have to do support. This could result in them working on low priority defects that are not as important as the feature that is being worked on. Things could also happen the other way around. There could be many high priority defects coming in that are swamping the support team. The people on the enhancement team would end up working on enhancements that are not as high priority as the incoming defects since they are fully allocated to the enhancement team.

Having the same team do both support and enhancements allows us to make sure we are working on the highest priority items at all times. This allows the customer to make trade off decisions about whether to prioritize the feature or the defect. During times where more defects are reported than normal, we can allocate more people to support as needed. When there are less defects reported than normal, we can allocate more people to features instead. Having this flexibility to easily adjust our allocation to enhancements or defects based on changes in priorities  is what we want.

### Avoid allocating time early in advance where the team will only do defect fixes
Some teams might come up with a team rule where every quarter they need to have 2 sprints where they only do defect fixes. Or maybe they come up with a team rule where every year there need sto be at least one quarter where they only do defect fixes. This does not mean that the team doesn't do defect outside of this time. It is just that when this time arrives, they will only do defect fixes.

This is a bad idea because it may cause us to not be working on the highest priority items at any point in time. If you look at the product backlog and the most important items are defects, then it is fine to have the whole team do defect fixes during that time. However, if no defects are identified as the highest priority items, we don't want the team to be forced to work on defects just because their team rule indicates that it is that time of the year to only do defect fixes.

### Dealing with issues reported in production: a two step process
When there is an issue reported in production, we can think of the way we handle the issue in terms of two steps. The first step is investigating the issue that was reported and the second step is fixing the issue. All issues reported in production should be investigated by someone right away but do not necessarily need to be fixed right away. The purpose of investigating the issue is so that we can get enough information so that we know how to prioritize it. We need to know if we should stop what we are doing to fix the issue or if it is something that could be put off to a later point in time.

The investigation portion might be making note of things such as how frequently the bug occurs, how high the impact is when the bug does occur, assigning a priority to the ticket, estimating the time it will take to fix the issue, or closing the ticket after determining it's not an issue. We should not spend much time determining if a change request is considered an enhancement or defect fix since that won't affect how early the change request is completed unless we have an SLA with the customer on defect fixes. Lastly, estimating defects is generally tougher to do than estimating enhancements so if you feel unsure then just mark the time estimate as unknown.

After the issue investigation is completed and it is determined that a code change is going to need to be made, the customer will make the judgement call of whether this code change needs to be made now or if it should wait. If the issue is high priority, then the customer would most likely have the developer start fixing the issue as soon as the investigation is done. If the issue is medium priority or lower, then there are a few different things that the product owner might do:
1. Pull the change request into the current sprint and start working on it now
2. Place the change request at the top of the product backlog so that it can be done in the next sprint
3. Place the change request farther down in the product backlog so it is done some time after the feature is released  

Dealing with defects when using Scrum is a little tricky so I think it deserves it's own section.

### Dealing with defects when using Scrum
Dealing with defects when using Scrum can be unclear at first because Scrum has this philosophy with sprints where adding new items to the sprint in the middle of the sprint is generally to be avoided when possible. The reason for this is that we do our sprint planning to produce the potentially shippable product increment that we can demo for feedback. Any change to the sprint could make it possible to fail the sprint goal. However, we have to be able to pull incoming defects into the sprint when they are high priority. As a result, we have two options for our sprint planning:
1. Fill up the whole sprint with work during the sprint planning. When high priority defects come in, pull them into the sprint and allow some of the originally planned work to not be finished
2. Plan each sprint with a buffer where we leave enough of the sprint open to where we feel comfortable being able to pull in new incoming high priority defects from production and complete everything. If no defects come in and we finish everything for the sprint early, take the next item off the top of the backlog.

I prefer scenario 2 so that we don't have as much of our sprint planning going to waste when defects arise and we are more likely to accomplish the goal of the sprint.  This makes it more likely to produce a potentially shippable product increment that we can get feedback on since we set our sprint goal smaller and more obtainable. 

When a defect is reported in the middle of the sprint, we will have someone immediately investigate it. After it is determined that a change needs to be made, one of three things could happen:
1. Pull the change request into the current sprint and start working on it now
2. Place the change request at the top of the product backlog so that it can be done in the next sprint
3. Place the change request farther down in the product backlog so it is done some time after the feature is released  

For high priority defects, we probably want to do 1. For everything else, the product owner will make a judgement call as to which of these three to do. If we pull too many defects into the current sprint, we are at danger of not accomplishing the sprint goal. This is what the buffer is for. The more we eat into the buffer during the sprint, the more the sense of urgency should be to avoid option 1 for incoming defects during the sprint. Being further along in our sprint also is a scenario where option 1 makes less sense because at that time we are almost ready for the new sprint planning anyway.

Option 2 might sound like a violation of what we discussed earlier about minimizing waste. If we finish our sprint without releasing our feature and then switch to the defect, shouldn't we have just fixed the defect first? This is the only scenario that is the exception to that rule. By moving the defect to the next sprint, we are more likely to complete the sprint goal and get feedback in our demo at the end of the sprint. In this case, we are considering the additional feedback from our demo to be more important than finishing the defect fix earlier.  

The more incoming defects that a team typically has to handle, the more we should:
* have a larger buffer for sprint planning
  * this allows us to handle more defects in the sprint  
* decrease the sprint duration  
  * this makes it easier to push the defect to the next sprint since that wouldn't be as long as a wait  
* spend less time doing sprint planning  
  * with more unpredictability, we don't want to spend as time doing sprint planning since a higher percentage of our planning could go to waste

As we can see, the more unpredictability there is, the less that our plans made in sprint planning will hold up. This brings up an interesting question: if we have a lot of unpredictability due to having many incoming defects each sprint, should we consider doing Kanban instead of Scrum? There is no widely accepted answer in terms of whether Scrum or Kanban is overall better. I will say that the more predictability there is, the more I prefer Scrum. The less predictability there is, the more I prefer Kanban. So for teams with huge amounts of incoming defects, I prefer Kanban. When there is an incoming defect when using Kanban, we just have to decide whether to do the defect fix right now or after our feature is done. There is no need to brainstorm whether to pull the ticket into the next sprint since no sprints are used in Kanban. Having no sprints makes handling random changes in plans easier.

### Monitoring progress of feature to help prioritize between defects and the feature
One thing to be careful of when trying to prioritize between incoming defects and the current feature we are working on is we could spend a bit more time than predicted doing defects instead of the feature which could cause our feature to become behind schedule. We should use a burn down chart to visualize whether or not our feature is on schedule . The more that our feature becomes behind schedule, the more the sense of urgency we might use to have incoming defects done after the feature is released.

### Cost of finding defects in different stages
A study from IBM was done in 2008 analyzing the cost of software defects found at different stages. The cost to fix a defect in coding was 6.5 times higher than the cost to fix a defect during design. The cost to fix a defect during testing was 15 times higher than during design. Finally, the cost ot fix a defect in production was 100 times higher than during design. This means that we should almost always avoid releasing with known defects.

### Summary
