## To what extent should we consider future potential use cases when doing design?
Suppose there are many tasks for a product that are planned to be worked on shortly. You are about to start doing design for one of the tasks now. Should you only look at your task and do design that is optimal for only your task? Should you try to do your desgin for your task in such a way that the other planned tasks will be easier? Should you take it one step further and try to do our design such that future potential tasks that we haven't came up with yet will be easier? In most cases, this is a question of how generic and re-usable our code should be. In other cases, it is a question of which scenarios our code should account for. There are two different approaches that come to mind when thinking about this.

### Coding for now
In this scenario, we write just enough code to meet the current requirements. We do not spend any time trying to make our code work for potential future use-cases that we don't currently have. We don't attempt to make our code any more generic than needed to solve the current problem we have. If there is a scenario that we are unsure as to whether or not we will need to account for in the future, we don't account for it right now. If we find out later that we do need to account for that scenario, then we will add the code to account for that scenario then.

### Coding for the future
In this scenario, we try to brainstorm future potential use-cases and make our code generic enough to account for them. This would include doing more code than what the current requirements would need. We spend extra time doing design early on in hopes that it will save time in the future.

### Which option should we go with?
It could be said that the amount we should code for potential future use-cases depends on the liklihood of the future use case being needed later as well as how much additional work it would take right now to account for that use-case. However, people tend to vastly over-estimate how likely a potential future use case will eventually be needed and vastly understimate how much extra work it would take to account for the future use-case. For almost all scenarios, we should just code for now instead.

The first downside you will notice when trying to code for the future is that it is incredibly difficult. You could be sitting there all day trying to field questions like "well what if tomorrow ______ happens and then ______ will no longer work?" "What if in the future, we need to account for ______?" You could easily turn a two day task into a complicated three month long task trying to account for every scenario that could possibly arise in the future. Most of the time, you will have no idea what might change in the future, even if you think you do. So any additional time spent trying to account for future use-cases that you currently do not have will rarely go on to pay for itself.

So we primarily just want our design to account for current use-cases that we have. Let's get back to the task design question now. We now know that when doing design for our task, we don't have to worry about our design accounting for future potential tasks that we haven't came up with yet. Should our design account for making other currently planned tasks either? If we know we will eventually need ______, then it makes sense to take that information into account when planning our task in order to avoid having the code get completely tossed.
